Qui chair. Can you hear us?
Uh, we can hear you, Mr.
Hawkes be, we can't quite see you at this
stage, but I'm there you are.
Yeah. Okay. So, um, uh, welcome.
We are, we are in your hands.
Uh, we'd just like to introduce Mr. Hawkes, be here.
Uh, and also joined by assistant governor, uh, Karen Silk,
and of course, chief economist Paul Conway, uh, for this,
the monetary policy, um, assessment, uh, November, uh,
by the FEC committee, the day following.
So, welcome.
Thank you, chair. Uh, Koto. Koto.
Uh, I'll keep, uh, opening comments very brief
'cause you've, uh, had the document, uh, and,
and sure have had a look.
We see the outlook for 2026 as one where,
uh, CPI inflation will be, uh, within the band, uh,
target range and falling towards, uh, 2%
by mid next year.
And one where the economy is expanding, uh,
building on the momentum that we are already seeing
through the second half of this year.
So, for the first time in quite a while, we're in a position
where we have, uh, a central projection
where risks are balanced both to the upside
and to the downside.
And we've published a, a projection
for the official cash rate, which is
around the level we are now, uh, through the course
of next year.
So after reducing rates
by over 300 basis points in recently, short time, uh,
we think we're in a position where we've got the best chance
to, uh, sit back and,
and monetary policy can be in the background
in 2026.
I'll leave it there chair.
And we're very, uh, happy to take questions.
If you direct them to me, I will bring, uh,
the team in as much as possible.
Okay. Thank you. Mr. Hawkes.
Be, we're going to go to the opposition, uh,
lead spokesperson, the Honorable Barbara Edmonds
Kia, everyone.
Um, thank you. Um, I think
in appear before Christian, is that right?
Oh, sorry, Barbara, you just cut out there.
You might, you might be on a bad line. Here we go.
Have you freed up now?
Can you hear me now? Yeah,
If, if you can just repeat that. Sorry, Barbara.
Yeah, so I was just asking, you know, is this, um, sort
of your commentary sort of points to that where the,
at the bottom of the easing cycle and,
and there are some indicators
for both upside and downside risk.
How does that reconcile with, um,
obviously more recent commentary since your announcement
yesterday, which are who are worried
that your statement is a little bit more hawkish
and that it may put upward pressure on morga on the OCR?
Yeah, so we were put out a central projection
that we think is, uh, consistent with the economic data
that, that we are seeing.
We we're conscious that there had been some expectation
that we might wanna keep the door more open to further cuts.
Uh, but we really have to, you know,
play what's in front of us.
And, and we think, uh, we are in a position where we can,
uh, put out a an OCR projection, which is broadly unchanged
because that is consistent with our mandate in the sense
of we've got confidence that it will see, uh,
the economy expanding
and inflation coming back to the midpoint of the target.
It's one that we, we think we're in a position where, uh,
we can sort of watch, worry
and wait, see how things, uh,
progress over the course of next year.
As always, there are upside and downside risks around that.
Uh, the difference this time around is
that we've already got the official cash rate, you know,
much lower than it was at the beginning of the year,
and that gives us that greater flexibility.
Okay. And, and in, and in relation to that flexibility,
I noted that one of your NPC members dissented, uh,
uh, was it five to one?
I think the decision was, um, just wanting to understand how
that, um, that particular dissenter, what,
not necessarily what they were saying,
but just how were they getting to that decision point
where they thought that actually they were going to dissent?
And I think it's a good thing
that there isn't group think on the NPC
'cause this is, I think, the second
time that this has happened.
Yeah,
Uh, that's right. So
we, we've actually, there's been
more voting in, in recent times.
We've voted, uh, three times in the last six, uh,
meetings while I've been chairing the committee.
Uh, there, there is a threshold to vote, which is, you know,
the, the committee member feeling uncomfortable about being
part of a consensus and, and taking a different decision.
Uh, this time around, uh,
the committee discussed two options.
Uh, one was to leave the official cash rate unchanged.
Uh, the other was to lower it by 25 basis points.
Uh, that that member who, uh, dissented was, uh,
in the camp of leaving the official cash rate unchanged at
this meeting, but leaving the door open, uh, to,
to lower it, uh, in the future if required.
So it was in part, uh, part around timing, uh,
in part around different members will often have a different
emphasis on upside and downside risks.
So this particular member had a little bit more emphasis on
the upside risks, uh, to inflation and the economy, uh,
and a, a a different view around timing.
I mean, because I mean, I, I can understand how they sort
of, um, got to that level given that sort
of inflation has increased, not as much as previously,
but it has been increasing over the last few quarters.
My, my, um, next question. Sorry, Mr.
Chair, if that's all right. That's alright.
Um, there's been a little bit of co um, discussion
around the transparency of MPC decisions
and whether we should have MPC committee members
brief select committees and, you know, around transparency.
Do you have any particular views in relation to that? Yeah,
I, I think we've been on a journey when I,
when I look back at my seven years on the committee, the,
the, the first charter for the, we have a remit, which is
around what we're trying to achieve
and what our objectives are.
And then we have a charter, which is about really
how we operate as a committee.
Um, seven years ago, the charter was very restrictive
around, uh, what committee members could say
and when they could say,
and, uh, when they could say things.
Through time, it's become more permissive.
Uh, and we've had the likes of Prassana guy, one
of our external members, uh, talking more frequently, uh,
externally, I think, I think we're on a path
to become more encouraging, uh,
to get more members out there talking,
uh, within the committee.
We just don't really think of ourselves of it as internals
and, and externals.
We don't really see that distinction.
And it would be good to get that across publicly as well
by more committee members, uh, talking.
What I would, uh, you know, provide some caution around
is going down a path where, uh, we have a lot
of committee members, uh,
effectively saying which way they're gonna vote
before we've even got together
and discussed what's the right thing to do.
And that's the position, uh, that, that I see overseas.
And, and it's one where you don't actually have a monetary
com policy committee listening to each other,
working together as a team, really trying
to do the right thing by the country, uh, collectively.
And you have more a bunch of individuals, uh, you know,
doing their own thing.
So I think if we become more open, more transparent,
but just be really careful that we don't lose, uh,
the really good things about the process that we've, uh,
evolved over the last seven years.
Thank you. And last, last question, if that's right, Mr.
Chief, and then just, uh, separate topic.
Um, obviously the economic indicators show some improvement
in different sectors, but faster than other sectors.
I mean, we've heard the word green shoots, I think
for the last 18 months.
Mm-hmm. And for a lot of people,
they don't feel the green shoots in their wallets.
And right now it's still really tough for a lot of people.
Yeah. So when you talk about spare capacity in the economy,
can you break that down for the average person
on the street, what that means, uh, in just normal terms,
like what is their capacity
and how does that impact on people?
'cause they're wanting to see relief,
but they've not, some people in the urban areas not feeling
it faster than those perhaps in the rural sector.
Yeah. Uh, so it's an acknowledgement
that at times have been tough.
It has been a tough period.
Uh, it, it, that has been a weak labor market.
It's been difficult to, uh, find work, uh,
unemployment has risen.
Uh, we are not using, uh, the, the people
and resources that, that we can, uh, fully, uh, that's what,
um, spare capacity means to us.
And, and what it, uh, points to from a,
from a monetary policy point of view is, you know, a,
a requirement for us to kickstart things, get interest rates
a lower, get some activity going.
What we see is that when, when demand picks up, uh,
businesses, invest, businesses employ all of those things
to, um, you know, make full use of the
resources that we have.
I'll, I'll get, uh, Paul
to talk a little bit about the special topic, uh,
that we've got in there on the labor market,
which I think is really valuable
because it kind of gets under the bonnet, uh, of, of
what spare capacity means, uh, for the labor market
and for the people of New Zealand.
Thanks, uh, governor.
So, but like, just building on that, from a,
from a business perspective, spare capacity, you know,
essentially means a lack of orders.
They could be cranking a little bit harder if, if not, if,
if people wanted to buy their product, uh,
in the labor market for people.
Obviously unemployment, uh, is up, you know, that's, uh,
there's a whole bunch of indicators in the labor market
around spare capacity.
So, you know, people, um, are more likely to be unemployed.
Uh, it's more difficult for unemployed people
to get back in the labor market currently.
So the job hiring rate, uh, is quite low.
Um, you know, there's not that many vacancies, uh,
available per unemployed person.
Uh, it's again, you know, it's just a, a period
where it feels like our
resources could be employed more fully.
Um, we do, we do think we're at, at the trough
or, you know, passing through the trough of, of
that output gap, that spare capacity has sort of been at,
at its maximum, um, touch wood.
Uh, and that that output gap, uh,
is closing less spare capacity in the economy going forward.
Okay. Thank you. I've got six hands up here.
I'm gonna go to Chloe Swarbrick
Morning.
Um, on page 34, you say,
and I quote, compared to history, it is hard
for unemployed people to transition back
to employment end quote.
Yeah. I guess could you unpack for us
how this sits historically?
Uh, and why?
Yep. Um,
So where are we?
I'm just looking at those, uh, graphs.
So yeah, the job finding rate.
I think, uh, Chloe, you're talking about S
30.5.
Yeah. Well, I'm talking about your quote from page 34
where you talk about it being hard for unemployed people
to transition back to employment compared to history.
And I'm just wondering if you could discern a few
of the variables as to why.
Yeah. So this, you know, we described this,
or we talked about it yesterday in the press conference, uh,
as a, a low hire, low fire labor market in New Zealand.
Um, so businesses are, you know, sort of holding onto labor,
given that not so long ago we went through a period of, uh,
very, a very tight, uh, labor market in terms of employees,
in terms of unemployed people.
Uh, the chances of finding a job
of transitioning from being unemployed to having a job is,
uh, is, is very low, uh, at the moment.
So unemployment has peaked,
or hopefully at around 5.3%, we think that's gonna sort
of hang in there over the December quarter
and into early next year
before improving as kind of a lagging, uh, indicator.
Um, and if, which is lower than it was in the global
financial crisis, um, for example, um, you know, which yeah.
But the, the probability of finding a job is, is, is low
for people, uh, at the moment.
In fact, it's a bit lower, uh, if you look at
that graph than it was, um, during that 2008, uh, period.
And I guess further to that point then, I mean,
how would you determine the efficacy
of monetary policy in particularly the OCR on
fixing something like that?
Um, like I, I think, you know, the, the OCR, the job
of the Central bank, it's all about
controlling the business cycle, uh,
and not, uh, sort of eliminating the business cycle.
It's about sort of chopping the peaks
and the troughs, uh, off with the objective
of keeping inflation at that 2% level.
So, you know, we absolutely, with changes in the OCR,
we do put a cyclical impulse through the economy, uh,
including the labor market.
Mm-hmm. Um, as opposed to more structural settings.
So there's countries that just have a lower rate
of unemployment, for example,
in general across the cycle compared to New Zealand
or countries where it's just easier for people to find a job
because those structural settings, uh, in the labor market,
um, you know, work, work well.
And could you just name, um, what it is
that you're talking about there, Paul,
when you're talking about those structural settings, just
to use that language so
that regular people at home can follow?
Yeah, I think like some of the Nordic countries,
they invest in, uh, act active,
what we call active labor market policies, where
You're talking about government fiscal policy there
and the limitations of monetary. I'm not,
I'm not talking about fiscal spending.
I'm, I'm talking about the sort of support services
that are, are wrapped around someone is who is unemployed,
and how much effort goes into transitioning them back into
the workforce education skills,
All of those micro bottom up factors.
And what I would acknowledge is that we,
if you look back over ly over the course of the last couple
of years, we have been, uh, slowing the economy, uh,
because inflation was too high.
Uh, and we've been, you know,
high interest rates have been part of that process.
We now are coming through the other side.
Uh, these, and the labor market indicators will be one
of the last ones to, to turn.
We've got the special topic that that shows
that there's much more going on
that just the headline unemployment rate.
There are a number of labor market indicators
that are starting to pick up.
Um, so vacancies, hours worked, hours paid, all
of these things are starting to turn.
And so as, as we go through next year, that's something
that we'll be looking, looking to the influence
of monetary policy on the labor market's going
to be positive rather than negative,
which is a nice place to be.
And, uh, and then separate to that,
there are all these structural issues that are outside
of our control that, that set, you know,
those deeper parameters.
If I may further to that point, Mr. Chair. Yeah, yeah.
Final question, then we've gotta move on. Yeah. Okay.
How do you assess then the risk
that the bank settings are potentially stimulating asset
markets more than real economic activity
or un uh, or employment?
Uh, it's just something that we constantly monitor.
The, the transmission mechanism of monetary policy.
We know it works through many different channels.
And, and so we, so we monitor that, uh, if anything the,
in this latest, um, easing, we've seen less
activity through that wealth channel.
Uh, you know, house prices haven't increased, uh, by nearly
as much as they have in previous, uh, cycles.
And if anything, they've been being flat,
it's been a missing element.
And that the other, the other channels are doing the work,
the cashflow channel, the exchange rate channel is one
that people haven't been talking about a lot,
but, which is very important in the way
that our interest rates have been lowered
relative to other countries.
That's helped the exchange rate, uh, be lower and,
and support the economy, uh, through that channel.
Yeah. So it's a case of constantly monitoring them.
Are they in totality doing enough to achieve our, uh,
inflation, uh, mandate
That's from a, a rate perspective,
but, um, the reserve bank can't direct the banks where to,
um, lend money that
that's a decision they make as a business.
That's a commercial decision.
Um, but what I would say is that credit
supply is not the issue in the market today.
There is plenty of supply there.
They have the capacity, they have the capital,
they have the liquidity to be able to do it.
It's credit demand, particularly in the business sector.
So what we've seen is with that increased uncertainty,
particularly that we saw through the mid part of this year,
um, with that uncertainty,
business investment really stalled.
And what they're looking for businesses themselves
before they start, uh, seeking more credit
and, uh, investing more in their businesses is for that
demand to pick up.
So they want to see more consumption, uh, you know,
people spending in order.
And when that picks up,
that's when you get that transfer through.
So the first indicators you are looking for is,
are we seeing people spending more?
And that will, that will start to drive activity
when activity comes up, then you start to see those,
those labor indicators that Christian was talking about, um,
start to to change as well.
And we are starting to see some of that.
And that's when you would expect to see that broaden
through 2026.
Right. Okay. Thank you.
Um, Karen, we're gonna go to Dr. Deborah Russell.
Uh, thank you. Excuse me, Mr. Chair.
Um, I want to, um, just
a little bit more on the under capacity.
Um, uh, I think the phrase you used,
um, a couple, a few questions.
There's a phrase that was used, low hire, low fire,
which is, um, uh, what's happening in,
in employment at the moment.
Um, but do you have a sense of to what extent as well,
employees are just sitting tight and choosing not to move
because, or choosing not
to risk a job they have already instead
of maybe going somewhere else?
Yeah, absolutely. That's exactly what is happening.
If you look at, there's a, uh, figure 4.6, uh,
on page 37, we've got a, a graph in there
of Jo job transitions,
so we can see when people change employers.
Uh, and you can see that was, that was very high, uh,
coming out of the COVID pandemic.
Uh, and then into, into the sort
of business cycle contraction that we've been living
through, um, the last 18 months or so.
Uh, it's very low.
So, so definitely there's a sense of people staying put, uh,
in their job be because of uncertainty.
It's kind of a precautionary, uh, you know,
rational precautionary behavior.
Yep. Thank you.
Um, that seemed plausible to me as well.
I just want to check out,
I had the right understanding there.
You said that, um, unemployment is predicted to
continue at about 5.3% over December
and into early next year.
And, um, so that's, um,
means people just don't have money in their back pockets
or they're scared they're gonna not have
a job or something like that.
But of course, that has a flow on impact into
the retail sector.
Do you have a sense of how many firms are kind of hoping
for a good Christmas, um,
or how many firms are just hanging in there? Um,
Yeah, All of them hoping,
but it's kind got me worried, um, in that sector. And yeah,
I just wanna give you some assurance.
The we are not waiting for a recovery.
A a recovery is happening right at the moment.
So, uh, Q2, yes, there was a contraction in Q2.
Uh, there's a whole lot of, uh, quirks
and statistical reasons why we think
that contraction wasn't nearly as bad as the headline.
Uh, negative 0.9.
We do think there was a contraction, not nearly that bad.
Uh, all our indicators are telling us now that, uh,
the economy expanded through Q3,
which is in the rear vision mirror.
You know, we're in Q4 now, uh,
and over the second half of the year is running
at an annualized rate, not far of short 3%.
So we're, we're getting that, uh, up uptick.
We're getting that momentum.
We're not seeing the official numbers, uh, yet.
What we're also aware of just coming back
to the labor market, those labor market, uh, indicators,
as Karen explained, uh, will tend
to be the last ones you see moving.
And it's, it's typically around a six month type lag
that you see between the economic activity expanding
and, uh, those coming through on the labor market.
So this, this is a normal, uh, this is a normal dynamic
that, that you would expect to see.
And we've got confidence around, uh, where things will be
as we get into next year.
And, and thank you.
Um, in, in terms of that, um, I was intrigued, um,
because of course you have the, the mandate
of keeping inflation within the band,
and if we, there's, there's gonna be pressure on
that if the economy's picking up.
And I did notice that the last, um, uh,
inflation figure was officially 3.0, that was by the grace
of the rounding gods.
Um, there was,
there was one point in it on the CPI measure the
CPI being one point different.
The inflation measure would've been 3.1%.
So, um, uh, how did that play into the c uh,
the OCR decision that you made? Yeah,
So, no, that, that's a wonderful question.
'cause I, I think it really highlights the two things that
as a committee we've been balancing all year.
Uh, and, and, and one of them is this, you know,
issue about spare capacity and,
and a bit of a worry that consumers, uh,
excessively consumers and households are in a bit of a funk
and they're excessively cautious on the one side.
Uh, the other side has been, uh, this sort of echo
of high inflation and that, and the memory of high inflation
and, and the influence that may have on price
and, uh, price setting behavior.
Uh, and so those are the two things
that we've been balancing.
Uh, one of the changes in this,
I think this latest decision really marks is, is a sense
that we have moved through that danger zone in, in a sense
that, uh, yes, headline inflation has blipped up a bit close
to 3%, but it hasn't followed
through into price setting behavior, uh,
inflation expectations, core inflation measures are falling
and, and have been falling.
Uh, and we've got a high, reasonably high degree
of confidence that, uh,
those next few quarters are gonna be coming down from 3%.
So it's, it's really a story
that given the pressure on inflation through
that channel is abating it, it means that we,
we actually need to create some inflation, uh, um,
through stronger economic activity such that we, you know,
balance those two and hit, hit the 2%.
Okay. So some engineering in there,
That's a factor.
Absolutely.
Is one last question if I may, Mr. Chair, just one? Yeah,
We've got six. We've still got
six hands up. We keep multiplying, but
Promise it's just one.
Um, um, uh, so, um, uh, a really difficult balancing task.
Um, I noticed that, um,
the big banks have immediately dropped their floating rates,
but their fixed rates haven't changed yet.
And I think the two year swap rate hasn't particularly,
I don't follow it exactly.
Can you comment on what's going on there?
What you think might be behind their thinking?
'cause of course. Um, yeah,
Yeah. Um,
so, so the, uh, OCR,
so the official cash rate is really has, um,
quite strong influence on that short term part
of the interest rate curve.
And the further you go out, it's other factors that start
to influence it as well.
So our greatest impact is in that short, in that short end.
Um, so the, the,
the roughly 10 basis point movement
that we've seen in the swap curve, uh, in the two year
that we've seen since the announcement yesterday is not a
surprise, uh, to us at all.
Um, actually a, a reasonable chunk of that is,
was an offshore overnight,
and that's just the offshore investors.
Um, they'll be forming a decision.
So when you are getting near, near
or at that turning point in the cycle, the role
that markets start playing is they start looking at, well,
what's the next move going to be?
And if they start thinking it's an upward move,
then they'll start trying to position themselves for that.
So there's a little bit of that going on
at this point in time.
Um, likewise, uh, you know, we may now start to see more
movement in the, um, from consumers,
households moving their mortgage rates out
a little bit further as well.
And that may also provide a little bit of upward pressure on
that wholesale rate because banks will try
and, um, hedge the risk that they take on
as a consequence of that.
Um, so that's on that side of it.
On the other side of it, it's gonna take a little, you know,
it will still take a little while for this credit growth
to start to, and demand to start to pick up.
So, um, in that repricing phase where we still have,
you know, we think something like 40% home loans over the
kind of next nine months
or so, um, need to reprice,
there'll be competition for that.
So, so, um, as we, you know, as we say, like there's,
there's, um, whilst mar margins might be back to kind
of the average historic level, it's still a healthy margin.
And so there's capacity there for more competition in terms
of the banks competing for those customers who are looking
to reset a new rate.
And they haven't, they've shown increasing propensity over
the years to shift banks in order to get that.
Okay, thank you. We're gonna go to, thanks, uh, Deborah,
we're gonna go to nationals.
Nancy Lou,
Uh, good morning and thank you chair,
and thank you for, uh, coming in.
Uh, my question is around, um,
your opening remarks this morning.
You said the economy is expanding, building on the momentum.
Now this is the first time that you didn't, well,
I didn't quite catch gr green shoots in your opening email,
but you actually said momentum.
So I wanted some specific examples that you see, um,
and that that will, that you know, that, that,
that driven you to give the word of momentum in the economy.
Um, and then have a follow up question. Thank you.
Yeah. Uh, so it was, it was really a comment about, uh,
my opening was talking about 2026, so what's,
I know what's likely to happen next year.
Yeah. And that's the, the economy expanding,
building on a momentum that we are already seeing in Q3
and Q4, uh, this year.
So we, we release a, a Kiwi GDP indicator, which
collates all the sort of real time, uh, indicators
that we are seeing, and we, um, publish that frequently,
that that's, uh, picking a 0.6 for, for Q3.
So again, that's looking in the rear vision mirror, uh,
in terms of where things have been, uh, we've got, uh, lots
of things coming through the, um, purchasing manager index.
The, um, those different employment, uh, indicators
that I mentioned, personal consumptions, um,
building consents are up.
Uh, so various, um, indicators that,
that all come together to build that, that picture
of what's not only, um, gonna happen in the future,
but what what's actually occurring right now.
Thank you. And my follow up question is actually around,
um, a comment that was made by, uh, the CEO of port
for Auckland who he said, um, the Port have had one
of the best month and the best 12 months in the last nine
years, and, and the bulk and,
and the bulk products that are coming in, including cement,
have been the highest that he's seen.
Do you take some of those market, uh, commentary
or data to, to add to your analysis?
Karen, do you wanna speak to our business?
Yeah. Um, so, so our teams, uh, go out on a regular basis
and talk to businesses, uh,
to understand what they're seeing.
Um, there's certainly still a little bit of a mix I would,
I would say there, but what, uh, the last round
of visits really in,
and that, that reflects a little bit of that two speed
economy still with the export sector doing, um, better
than the domestic, uh, sector, you know, over the,
over the past kind of six months or so.
Um, but, uh, what they are starting to see
and certainly indicating is, uh,
even in the domestic spaces, stabilization.
So, um, and they're retaining that positive outlook
that they, they are seeing,
they expect things to get better.
I think stabilization is, is the key word. Yeah.
They see demand stabilizing in the economy very much
consistent with that, that green shoots word.
Yeah. We, we, we don't use that word,
but it's actually not a bad description.
Yeah. That's great. Okay. Thank you, Nancy.
Thank you so much. We're gonna go to New Zealand first.
Uh, Dr. David Wilson,
uh, you're on mute,
David. That's it.
Thanks chair. Um,
really interesting words you used at the beginning.
Um, uh, Mr.
Sby talking about an expanding economy
and reducing interest rates.
Um, given what we've been through, uh,
which is pretty much the opposite, um,
I just want you to make a comment.
Um, there was a UBS commentator that said that, um,
in his first time in the seat looking at New Zealand from
Australia, um, saying
that we were perhaps a little conservative
and a little bit slow to reduce the a CR
and perhaps we, you know, didn't get in there earlier.
So I'd like to get your comment on that,
given the success we are now having, well,
I would call it success at this stage, looking forward,
you know, expanding economy and low interest rates.
Yeah. That's interesting.
Yeah. Well, thank you. We, we,
we do think we're in a good spot, uh, going forward,
and we think we're in a spot that, uh, central banks like
to be in, uh, and,
and other central banks would like to be in.
We all, we all have our turn.
Having, being in a good spot or being in a tricky spot.
The, um, you know, w the way things have evolved, uh,
this year, as I mentioned earlier, there have been risks,
uh, e either, either side of the story, uh, and,
and the fact that we've been living in that environment
where, uh, that echo of high inflation, um, still being
around that memory of high inflation still being around did,
and getting up close to the top of the band did,
did create a risk where, um, inflation expectations could,
and price setting behavior could ratchet up and,
and really remove that ability to, to ease policy.
Uh, we, we feel like we're coming through the other side of
that, which has really marked that shift from,
from a quite a cautious, uh, approach through July, uh,
through into October where it was a shot in the arm
to businesses, uh,
and consumers that to, to get out of that excessive caution
to one where we are, uh, at the moment
where we think there's a really good chance
that we can just step into the background, uh,
and let the, you know, let the economy do its thing,
get off the front pages, uh, let the, you know,
the good news of, uh, New Zealand businesses,
um, step to the front.
Yep. Look forward to a little bit of an, uh,
pressure on interest rates, um, coming into next year.
But second question, just following up, uh, with Dr.
Russell's discussion around the bank's reaction
to mortgage rates, um, note
that the net interest margins have not really
shifted that much.
And some commentators are telling us
that on average we are 1%, uh,
above Australia in a similar situation.
So it, it's, it's concerning really that, uh,
if you follow on and, and I understand the long term
and the two year swap rates
and all that kind of thing coming into play,
but that said, overall whether things are going well
or things are not, uh, starting to look better,
we're still stuck with this dead interest we rate margin
that we don't seem to be able to get on top of.
Yeah. Yeah. Karen.
Yeah. Uh, so near interest margin is, yeah,
definitely, um, the right thing in my view to look at,
uh, because there are, obviously you need
to look at both the, what's happening on a funding cost
perspective, um,
and we are lending rates are sitting at,
and that's where the net interest margin
story comes into it.
And I, and you know, New Zealand, um,
banks are significantly funded by deposits
from within the New Zealand market.
And so, uh, where we might see that, uh, you know,
at different points in the cycle, you may well see that the
gap between retail
and wholesale deposit rates, uh, may narrow
or expand depending on whether we are in a rising
or interest rising interest rate
or a falling interest rate, um, scenario.
And that's when at times there's also lags
and you might see movement, uh, above
and below where that relative to where the average has been.
Um, the thing that really changes that is competition, uh,
and, you know, that that's, that's the, the biggest thing
that, uh, will change the average margin
or net interest margin story.
So, um,
looking at it on a singular product basis doesn't
necessarily drive, uh, a different competition story.
Okay. Thank you.
Uh, Dr. Wilson, I'm gonna go to Ryan Hamilton, our,
our deputy chair from national
and members, if we can just stick with singular questions
and, and, uh, to our panelists,
if we can have a relatively succinct answers
as I wanna get through everyone.
Ryan,
Fire Graham.
Uh, yeah. How have recent shifts in fiscal
and regulatory settings influenced the more positive trends
you started to talk about today in, in your report?
IE inflation trade and investment and confidence?
Uh, quick fire question is
that they've really sat in the background.
Uh, we, we take the budget numbers as, uh,
given there wasn't a large discussion of, of fiscal policy,
uh, you know, clear focus on
structurally getting in a good position fiscally, which, uh,
is positive for monetary policy in terms of providing room
and space to do what we need to do.
Yeah. Good. Thank you. Okay.
We're gonna go to nationals, um, Dan Bida.
Hey, thanks Mr. Chair. Thanks. Um, uh, Mr.
Hawkes being to your team and,
and personally thank you for your service.
Uh, and I know this is the last time you'll be, uh,
appearing before us.
Um, just want to, um, talk about the, uh,
underpinning assumptions for the forecast for 26.
So, um, take your point.
It's looking more rosier than in the past.
Um, but I, we did notice your productivity growth forecast
and your GDP growth forecast is lower than treasury
and lower than I think IMF uh,
world Outlook forecast came out a few months ago.
So, um, just wanting you to talk us
through why that's different.
Is it just the different years endings?
Um, is there something of substance if we undershoot
and they are actually more in line with treasuries forecasts
or the IMS forecast, what that might mean
for inflation expectations in the future?
Thank you.
So quick fire question.
It, it's really a statistical one where we, we just look at,
uh, measured, uh, productivity growth.
What, what we're seeing.
We look, we see what we're seeing in terms
of population growth, working age, population growth.
That together gives us a sense of that, uh,
potential run rate, uh, which is a
around one point half percent for us.
We're in an environment where we've got a lot
of spare capacity, which means the economy can grow much
faster than 1.5% at, at the moment.
'cause it's got that spare capacity to eat up.
Um, however, uh, further down the track, it does, uh,
become a constraint without some other policy, uh, you know,
outside of monetary policy, uh, helping to lift that.
Okay. Thank you. Oh,
Thank you, Dan.
I'm gonna go to Dr. Megan Woods from labor.
Thank you. And thank you team for coming in.
Um, and thank you for the special topic
on, um, the labor market.
Really interesting. Just want to go to page 35
and chart if, which is the under utilization rate.
Um, and I think there's some really interesting
commentary with this as well.
You note that, um, it's not at the peaks of the GFC,
but we are seeing that that under utilization rate is
climbing and what we see for that period
after the GFC is a protracted period of time
of under utilization.
And just wonder what we understand about
who is making up those numbers.
'cause of course, that's people that want to work more, um,
and can't find that work
and whether we understand where they are geographically
and, um, demographically.
So, uh, are we to see an overrepresentation of women
and, um, what the projections around that, um,
whether we are looking for that to abate
or if people really are giving up,
and this is driving the record numbers
of people receiving, leaving New Zealand.
Yeah. Well, I, I think, I think your, your, your point,
uh, around people leaving New Zealand is related
to the labor market and especially relative
to the Australian, uh, labor market.
We're in very different phases, uh, of the cycle,
which is driving those trans taman numbers.
I think we, we do have data on the, on sort of breaking down
that under utilization rate.
I don't have them sort of, uh, top of mind.
Um, in terms of, uh, the GFC, uh, it's a little bit less,
uh, extreme than what it was over the GFC.
And if you relate it to our projections for output, um,
we are currently forecasting a more rapid, uh,
pickup in the economy than
what we saw in the global financial crisis,
which really lingered, uh, for a long time.
If our forecast come, come to be true.
Uh, we, we, we haven't gone as deep as GFC
and we are coming back to sort of, uh,
a potential growth more quickly,
and we would expect that to be echoed in the sort
of labor market under utilization numbers.
I guess concerning is, we are saying that while
that's not reaching the peak, we are seeing some
of those youth unemployment numbers that are reaching it.
So understanding what really sits within that under Yeah.
So absolutely. Yeah. And, and, and,
and typically you, you're being on it, it's women Maori
and Pacifica and youth
and youth that feel the impacts of a,
of a tough labor market most, uh,
and they also, uh, enjoy the benefits, uh, when the,
when the labor market is tight
and the economies are booming, uh, those, those part
of the demographics, uh, really shift, uh,
positively, uh, for them.
But right now it's, it's tough.
We, we see that clearly in the unemployment, uh, data.
Those, those groups are, are bearing the burden
of the contraction we've been in.
Thank you. Okay. Okay. Thank you Dr. Woods.
Uh, we're gonna go to x uh, Todd Stevenson.
Thank you. And thank you, uh, team for coming in today.
Um, I just wanna pick up, Mr. Hawkesbury,
you made a comment, I think that, uh,
really encouraging annualized growth rate, um, I think
around 3% you said.
I just wanna, um, uh, understand your perspective on is
that sustainable, uh, going forward?
How does the, um, bank see that?
And then historically, uh, that's obviously a, a reasonable,
uh, growth rate, so historically Yeah.
How does that kind of, um, looking Yeah,
So, uh, the short answer is
that it's not sustainable in, in the long run.
Our, our assumption for potential growth is closer
to one point a half percent on an annual basis.
But it's the, it's the point that we've got a lot
of spare capacity at the moment, uh,
that we're in an environment
where the economy can grow faster than potential,
and that's how you close that gap.
So our, our predict projections do have one where, uh,
growth gets up, up and around three, 3% as that gap closes.
But, but further out, um, to lift things
above 1.5% are gonna involve, uh, structural changes
that don't, that aren't related to, to monetary policy.
Our best contribution, keep inflation low
and stable, get monetary policy off the front pages, uh,
enable businesses
and com uh, consumers just to have confidence to get on
and make long-term decisions.
So it's a business cycle upswing that we are heading into.
The, the, the true trick to lifting wellbeing long-term is
to lift those structural growth rates. Right?
And that's kind of to your point, then, uh,
employment will pick up, et cetera. Um,
It'll pick up because of that, up
that cyclical move. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Okay,
I'm gonna go back to Chloe
Albrook. We've got a little bit of time.
Cool. Um, I was just wondering if R-B-N-N-Z had a view on
the relationship or correlation
between government investment and business investment spent?
Uh, take any takers, depends On what's driving it.
I mean, the reason that I ask, right, is
that we've obviously got, uh, government
and fiscal policy, which is kind of contracting expenditure,
and we're also seeing that there's a contraction
of expenditure from businesses as well.
I guess I'm just wondering if you could offer any thoughts,
um, or if you have any view on Yeah.
Or even unpack those variables on it, what it depends on.
Look, I think from a, the, the way I would think about
that, like, we are seeing government consumption
and government investing contracting in, in the economy,
getting smaller as a share, uh, of the economy.
Um, and, you know, that's, you know, that's taking a bit
of pressure off interest rates
and lower interest rates encourage private
sector investment.
So I'm not sure that there's a sort of hard
and fast correlation, uh, there.
But I think through the dynamics of monetary policy,
you know, within time over the medium term, uh, you know,
you might see private sector sort of filling any gaps, uh,
that the public sector has sort of exited from.
But it's, it is not like an economic, you know, it's,
it's not a Yeah, it's more about cyclical dynamics rather
than a sort of economic constant. Yeah.
And a couple of the, there's a concept in
economics crowding out.
Mm-hmm. Which is where there's too much government
investment, it pushes up interest rates and,
and businesses, you know, s business investment, the,
i the ideal world is where you're crowding in
and, uh, you're creating an environment where both, um,
both growth, both, both are building the productive capacity
of the, the economy. Yeah.
And I mean, there's also the economic concept
of the multiplier effect, that being the types of investment
that government can make, uh, which go to the core of
what Paul was talking about
before, with regard to, um, investment and job creation or,
and employment opportunities
or an infrastructure which will facilitate
greater productivity and growth.
Right. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Thank you.
Okay. Uh, anyone else? Right?
Um, governor, can I just ask you, um, uh, one final,
uh, question to paint us a picture, a picture of what, uh,
2026 will look like for Kiwis?
What it will feel like for New Zealanders?
Uh, it's one where inflation is going to be a low
and falling, and one where the economy is going
to be, uh, expanding.
So it's a good environment, uh, to be stepping into, uh, in,
into the next, next year.
And hopefully you'll see less, less of us and,
and more of being able to get on, get on with life
and enjoy what everything that New Zealand has to offer.
Thank you. And Mr. Hawkes be,
can I, on behalf of Mike, sorry.
Um, Megan's got her hand up.
Cameron, she's had it up for a while.
Well, I, I asked for a final round of questions,
That's when she had her hand up.
No, I asked my question. Okay. Alright.
Okay. Well thank you Deborah.
Um, well finally, uh, uh, Mr.
Hawkes be, can I acknowledge on behalf of my colleagues
and all mps, I'm sure, uh, your significant
and successful service at the Reserve Bank, uh,
over a number of years and wish you
and your family every success and all the best.
Thank you. That's very kind.
And thank you all for your service
and your engagement with the Reserve Bank.
Uh, and I know that we'll continue on in the same spirit.
Okay. Thank you. Thanks so much, very much.
And thank, thank you, uh, Karen, and thank you Paul.
Thank you to the three of you for appearing before us.
Thank you. All the best. Thank you.
Okay, members, we will, uh, uh, turn your microphones
and videos off.
We will reconvene for the taxation bill hearings
at five past 10.
Thank you.